1.    Does the story explain the causes of a problem? A solution should be explained in the context of the problem it’s trying to address. The causes of that problem should be reported on in ways that make clear the opportunity for a solution to create impact. If the article is short, however, the reporter may only have room to make a brief reference to the causes.
2.    Does the story present an associated solution to that problem? The acid test; if the story doesn’t describe a solution, it’s not solutions journalism.
3.    Does the headline (or lead sound bite, if radio/TV) reflect a solutions angle?  Some stories may identify responses – but the headline may signal greater emphasis on a problem. Headlines should create a “hook” that makes the solution prominent.
4.    Does the story address the problem solving and how-to details of implementation?  A great solutions story delves into the how-to’s of problem solving, investigating questions like: What models are having success improving an educational outcome and how do they actually work?
 5.    Does the description of the problem solving process produce a powerful narrative?  Solutions journalism, like all journalism, is about great story telling. It should include characters grappling with challenges, experimenting, succeeding, failing, and learning. But the narrative is driven by the problem solving and the tension is located in the inherent difficulty in solving a problem.  
6.    Does the story put more emphasis on the solution, or on the role of a leader? We see a clear distinction between solutions journalism and what is often called “good news.”  “Good news” stories tend to celebrate individuals and inspirational acts. Solutions journalism is about ideas, how people are trying to make them work, and their observable effects. 
7.    Does the story consider other factors, besides the solution, that could explain a success?  The connection between a solution and corresponding results isn’t always clear. A reporter should critically explore and explain other potential causes of the change or impact.  
8.  Does the story explain the weaknesses of the solution?  There is no such thing as a perfect solution.  Every response has caveats, limitations, and risks. Good solutions journalism does not shy away from imperfection. 
9.    Does the story present results, or indications of progress, linked to the solution? Solutions journalism is about ideas – but like all good journalism, the determination of what works (or doesn’t) and how is supported by solid data and evidence. If there is no solid data or evidence, does the journalist draw on first-hand observation or early anecdotal results to make a credible case for the effectiveness of this response?
10.    Does the story convey an insight or teachable lesson?  (core SJ) What makes solutions journalism compelling is the discovery — the journey that brings the reader or viewer to an insight about how the world works and, perhaps, how it could be made to work better. 
